with my two kids um they're watching me
they watch what i do every day and what
i do is what they're going to absorb
and so either i'm teaching them that
when life gets difficult really
difficult
you give up
or when life gets difficult
you keep going on no matter how
difficult it gets
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr terry walls she's an
author and clinical professor of
medicine at the university of iowa as
well as living proof that you should
absolutely let food be thy medicine she
was diagnosed with ms and spent four
years dependent on a tilt-recline
wheelchair because she was so devastated
by her symptoms but instead of giving up
she dove headlong into the research and
ultimately created what is now known as
the walls protocol a diet-based
rehabilitation program that took her
from being wheelchair-bound to now
riding her bike to work every day today
a full 20 years after being diagnosed
she continues to thrive and help
countless others with her diet and
lifestyle therapies dr walls welcome to
the show
hey thank you for having me
it is amazing to have you your story is
insane um and i want to start the thing
that i find most profoundly interesting
about your story is the way that you
responded to being diagnosed with ms a
lot of people i have to imagine just
sort of fold up and accept that fate
it's pretty daunting uh medical
literature is all going to tell you it's
a one-way street so how did you get
yourself in a proactive state oh yeah
well that was uh very straightforward i
have when i was diagnosed had two very
young kids
aged eight and five
and you know when they were really young
i'd assumed i was going to teach them
how to be successful adults by
athletics wilderness travel whitewater
kayaking cross-country skiing
mountain climbing
teaching them martial arts
but of course that became very
quickly apparent
that was not going to be possible
and so i i knew they their success was
very important to me so i had to keep
reimagining how was i going to teach
them how to be resilient
um as i was getting more and more and
more disabled
i and so ultimately i realized that all
i had was that you don't give up you get
up you go to work you do the best you
can
and then i was like okay i have to read
everything that i possibly can
to slow the decline because i knew
recovery was not possible i knew that
functions once lost were were completely
gone and so i was doing all this not to
recover i was doing all this to slow my
decline
and i had been a vegetarian i got
introduced to lauren curdain's work i
went back to eating meat i gave up all
grain all legumes all dairy
i could still declined i needed the
wheelchair the next year um i'm taking
chemotherapy then i'm taking tyzabri i'm
still declining
uh and then it's like okay
the best medicine from the best people
in the country is not stopping my march
towards a bedridden
demented life i also have trigeminal
neuralgia as part of my uh problem and
so
those episodes of pain were getting
steadily more frequent more severe
and more difficult to control
and so
i might also be having to come to terms
with
intractable pain
i and so
it's like okay
i'm going to go back to reading the
basic science
and i would develop theories that
mitochondria were the big driver for
disability in ms so i i was focused in
on brain nutrition focused in on
mitochondria focused in on cellular
health
now at first i did supplements
you know and i'd already already made a
big change to my diet that didn't do a
lot added supplements that helped my
fatigue a little bit
and and i was thrilled
and the speed of my decline was slowing
and i was thrilled but of course i was
still declining
i want to i want to dive into that a
little bit more
it has got to be very difficult for
people to conceptualize that
ms 20 years on is
either the person has has just
completely um either they've passed away
or they have been just failed to manage
the symptoms become bedridden demented
whatever so for you to be
practicing medicine for you to be
you know physically active and doing the
things you're doing it i don't use the
word miracle but like
just if i were to juxtapose two things
it's insane like to
to really contextualize that for people
legitimately up until you being sort of
this demarcation point it was it was a
one-way street so i want to focus on the
mindset in that moment it's super dark
you're researching this paper everyone
is telling you
and you you know you even said you used
the word no i knew that there was no
coming back from this how did you see
the evidence when you were so convinced
that there was no coming back
well i so
there was no coming back but i could
slow my decline
and i had this obligation to slow it as
much as i could um
and besides with my two kids
they're watching me they watch what i do
every day and what i do is what they're
going to absorb
and so either i'm teaching them that
when life gets difficult really
difficult
you give up
or when life gets difficult
you keep going on no matter how
difficult it gets
and uh
it's certainly what i saw with my
parents who were farmers uh that you
know life's
not not fair you have you have good
weather you have bad weather you know uh
you know up up markets down markets but
you keep doing everything you can as
well as you can forever
or you give up and giving up is just not
an option and i do want my kids to see
giving up as an option
absolutely i tell my kids that uh it's
my perception that they saved my life
my children were absolutely instrumental
in my getting through this
my wife was absolutely instrumental in
my uh having the courage to get through
all of this
yeah
it was not easy
yeah you know facing being
bedridden that's not easy but doable
facing uh
losing cognitive abilities
that's not easy uh that's doable
my fear is that
there will be a time that that pain is
turned on
nothing turns it off
and light
sound triggers the pain the breeze
triggers the pain
talking triggers the pain swallowing
my children trying to comfort me
triggers the pain i'm trying so hard
to not flinch or jerk when they're
trying to comfort me so
i'd cut i had come to terms with
bedridden and demented
i had not come to terms with
face pain trigeminal neuralgia turned on
and not being able to have it be turned
off
but you know now with what with my diet
and lifestyle
as long as there's no exposure to gluten
dairy or eggs i'm pain-free
if i come to your home and you
accidentally serve me contaminated food
within six to 24 hours my pain will turn
on
let's talk about that so you you go into
the research and
what was it that made you put your
finger on the mitochondria what's
actually happening in ms
so uh there's two there's two uh disease
processes with ms there's the
inflammatory component which is when you
have the acute relapse
and you have worsening of the symptoms
and then if you if you did an mri you'd
see
an acute inflammatory lesion in my brain
or my spinal cord
and then my
the acute inflammation subsides
i and my brain and spinal cord i can add
some additional sodium channels
and i can
make the signals work again more slowly
but they can work between my brain and
my sensory organs or my brain and my
motor organs
uh and so that's when the symptoms remit
the relapse is the worsting symptoms the
remission is the recovery and improved
function
and then there's another process that
happens
this slow accumulation of fixed
disability
of permanent sensory loss
of permanent motor loss
and the slow accumulation of shrinking
brain
and shrinking
spinal cord
now we think that
that's volume loss uh due to uh loss of
the axons that's of the wiring that goes
between brain cells
that dies off
so why does this uh loss of brain volume
loss of spinal cord volume uh breakage
of the axons why does that happen
uh the thinking has been that the
mitochondria can't make enough energy
uh to maintain the wiring to maintain
the brain cells and they atrophy or die
and do you know what's going so from a
diet perspective i'm gonna guess leaky
gut is a big part of this that um well
you know starting in 2000 i started
reading you know nobody very few people
were talking about leaky gut
and very few people were talking about
mitochondria as a big driver for ms
but because i was reading the basic
science for
ms
and then for other diseases that had the
shrinking brain as the hallmark of the
disease
and the slow accumulation of disability
as the hallmark because that was the way
my ms manifests so i'm reading about
other progressive neurologic disorders
uh parkinson's and alzheimer's bank two
that i read
and in those diseases
mitochondria were sending signals to die
too early so i figured okay that's
probably a factor for ms and i might as
well figure out what i could do to
support my mitochondria
and of course originally i was looking
for drugs then eventually it's like okay
you know that's not going to work
so then i started looking for
diet
couldn't find much there so then i went
down the animal model
supplement path
and so i started with a a variety of
supplements
yeah b vitamins coenzyme q lipoic acid
uh carnitine
uh and added those you know in
interesting after about six months
the uh professor of medicine sort of
reared back up and said oh you're you're
wasting your money
you're not any better you know just so i
quit everything
and uh two days later i just could not
seem to get out of bed
i was even more exhausted than usual
and then after the third day my wife
came and in you know honey i think i why
don't you try taking your supplements
again and i did and the next day i could
get up and go to work
and i thought wow that's really
interesting
so two weeks later we did the same thing
i stopped everything i and
after 36 hours
my energy was even worse i couldn't i
really couldn't get out of bed
i waited three days
i took my supplements again and that
following morning i could function
so i was thrilled like
i'm figuring some stuff out that my
neurologist is not telling me that my
primary care doc is not telling me
and now i'm i'm very excited about
reading uh the basic science and reading
the research do you know about what was
in the supplements that you were taking
that was actually having the impact
well sure you know these supplements
were really designed to uh help with the
krebs cycle be more efficient uh so that
was the b vitamins the coins mq uh the
lipoic acid uh the extra magnesium
uh carnitine
so i want to walk people through um just
to sort of recapitulate what you've just
said for somebody watching so you're
looking at the research you begin to
realize okay there's something going on
here with the type of
disease that i have there are other
diseases like it the one thing that they
all have they seem to have in common is
something around the mitochondria the
ability to harness the energy and then
i'm guessing the next step is going to
be beginning to ask yourself the
question of why are they malfunctioning
in the first place
so
yeah actually for me in my recovery
story this
went over several years and uh but and i
want to set this up so at this point
i'm so weak i can't set up like i'm now
i've been a zero gravity chair
knees higher than my nose
um i struggled to walk 10 feet using two
walking sticks i'm beginning to have
brain fog i know
my chief of staff
is pressuring me and i'll soon have to
uh file for medical retirement
so that's where i'm at
and my face pains are more frequent much
more difficult to turn off i am very
afraid they're going to be permanently
on
i i discovered the institute for
functional medicine take the courses i
love it i have a longer list of
supplements
not a lot happened
but i have another
really big aha
like what if i take
this this longer list of supplements
that i'm taking now and i figure out
where they are in the food supply
and i redesigned my paleo diets i
decided that that science made made some
good sense so i redesigned my paleo diet
in a very specific way
to
stress the nutrients i was taking
uh in the food
you know what's in uh blueberries or
what's in uh tomatoes or what's in uh
green leafy vegetables it is much more
than a single nutrient that might be
taken in the capsule
in that we have
we as a species have been eating food
for a long time which is very
complicated
and so maybe
what i'm taking in supplements i should
figure out as these are markers of
what's a really nutrient-dense diet that
my brain needs and i should figure out
if i if i get the food i'm probably
gonna get thousands of more compounds
that are really important for my brain
that we haven't yet figured out what
what the names are or what what the
roles are but they're probably really
important
and so
again that takes me about three months
to you know get this sort of sorted out
because my dietician friends they can't
help me the librarian can't help me so
i'm back to
uh doing online searching and it turns
out the linus pauling institute for
micronutrients uh was very helpful for
me
in figuring out good food sources for
all these key nutrients
what year is this
this is 2007. december 26th i start this
new way of eating
it's still paleo but now it's very
structured paleo
i'm making sure i'm having liver once a
week
and now i'm having a very specific array
and less meat only about six to twelve
ounces it's about two palm size servings
uh and
very specific bunch of vegetables lots
of green leafy vegetables lots of
cabbage family onion family mushroom
family vegetables and deeply pigmented
things like beets carrots berries and
this is all going back to the
supplements that were working for you
and just trying to find them in their
their natural state
trying to find trying to reorganize my
food
around that nutrient list
and so
within a month my pain is gone
my trigeminal neuralgia is gone
my brain fog is gone
my fatigue is gone
so that's in one month
in three months
i can sit up and i can eat at the table
again
i
am beginning to walk with walking sticks
and and my colleagues at the hospital
are like oh my god dr walls you're
you're you're walking because they
didn't see me walk
you know in years
and then
at six months
and this was on mother's day in 2008
i uh
tell my family i want to try riding my
bike
and we have to have this emergency
family meeting because
my kids are very concerned they don't
want me to fall i wondered about that
uh it might
so fortunately my wife decides that my
son can jog in the left my daughter will
jog in the right she'll follow on her
bike
we walk my bike down to the curb we wait
for the all clear
and i push off
and i could bike around the block
you know my son's crying
my daughter's crying my wife's crying
i've cried
it felt miraculous then
it's still a very emotional moment for
me because i had never thought i'd get
to bike again
and then
six just a few months later
on october she signs us up for the curry
drive
which is an 18.5 mile bike ride
and of course i'm like
that's pretty far i probably can't go
that far but you know how before i can
go it will be miraculous
so i
we start off i have to take a couple
breaks but in fact i bike 18.5 miles
so once again you know my son's crying
my wife's crying
i'm crying
my daughter's crying
and this fundamentally changes how i
think about disease and health it will
change the way i practice medicine
and it will ultimately change the type
of research that i do
that that story is so incredible and so
transformational if you had to distill
what that change is
what is that change is it just more
natural remedies food-based the the
changes that uh i focus on teaching my
patients how to create health
that the drugs that we prescribe treat
symptoms but they don't create health
health
is it is because the diet and lifestyle
that we're living is the mismatch
between what our dna expects and what
we're providing it
and so if i teach my patients how to eat
closer to what our ancestors ate you
know vegetables and a protein source and
i have a different strategy for
vegetarians who are vegetarian for their
spiritual beliefs than those who eat
meat
that we exercise we meditate we have a
positive social network and we have
seen remarkable transformations with
diabetes obesity rheumatoid arthritis
stomach lupus fibromyalgia uh ms of
course uh severe pain from poly
neuropathies old war injuries
heart heart failure
by creating health by teaching people
this is all about your diet and your
health behaviors
and then we have to watch them carefully
because
once i show them how to
create health by improving their diet
and lifestyle
their blood pressure begins to normalize
and we have to start adjusting their
blood pressure meds their blood sugars
begin to normalize we have to begin
adjusting their blood sugar meds
their pain
fades away and we start rolling back
their pain meds
yeah and then if they're on a chronic
disease modifying drug therapy
and we've had great response so that
their disease activity is negligible
and their biomarkers are normalizing
then like we have conversations with
their specialist about
either transitioning them to a
milder immune suppression or tapering
them off immune suppression entirely
man it's amazing like hearing the kind
of changes that people go through on the
walls protocol
let's walk through some of the basics of
what creating health is and i think
something that will help people is what
are the insults that people are
adding to their lives you know is it
sugar is it being sedentary is it
indoors like what are what are the key
components
our food has been designed to be
addictive
to create cravings i uh it'd be very
very cheap so a lot of sugar a lot of
processed foods
vegetables
meats
are much more expensive people will have
that
i and so
our ancestors would have had
um
protein according to the success of the
hunt
and carbohydrates uh green materials
roots berries according to the season
and what was locally uh available at
that time so everything was fresh
organic in season we've been having
fermented foods fermented vegetables uh
for about a hundred thousand years
cooking for about a hundred thousand
years
and you know our ancestors uh once we
moved into uh northern climates and had
winter
you had you were either fasting during
the winter or you had a successful hunt
you had protein or you had fermented
vegetables
because there was no freezer and there
was no canning
were physically very very active because
it took a lot of work to get your food
either either as hunters or as farmers
either way it was a lot of work
and we slept at night there was no
artificial light living habits were in
perfect synchrony
with the day night cycle
we had small small social networks and
we had to get along because
the the clan couldn't survive
if you were fighting all the time you
had to work out your differences
because you know i i depended on you as
part of my hunting plan or part of my
farming plan
we had to figure out how to cooperate
and get along
i may not like you but i had to at least
cooperate with you
it's interesting to me how much you talk
about connection and
that part
what's physiologically you can see
the impact on tissues like the heart if
somebody doesn't have
good strong communal relationships
yes
what what at a mechanistic level like i
get at the
level of like hey we're humans and we're
bonding animals and all that but like
mechanistically what on earth what what
are the molecules
yeah like what's happening yeah yeah so
at the molecular level um at my cortisol
levels uh that is going to go up with
stress down uh when i have sense of
safety
if i have uh isolation
then my cortisol level will go up uh my
cytokine levels and we have these
inflammatory in these uh uh
declining or anti-inflammatory cytokines
uh really fast sorry to interrupt i need
to understand cytokines better so this
is something here with coven 19 that
we're hearing a lot about cytokine
storms and what are cytokines so let me
sort of talk a little bit about
inflammation
inflammation are my immune cells they go
around and inspect
cells all over my body and the cell is
healthy needs no work
or the cell is damaged needs to be
repaired and replaced so if the cell is
damaged i'm going to
release some cytokines that call other
immune cells to come in
and dissolve that damaged cell and
replace it
and so those are the inflammatory
cytokines
and now we have we call it a different
set of uh cytokines to do the rebuilding
and the repair work
and then the repair work is done and so
now the inflammation should stop
and so then we have a third set of
cytokines that
resolve everything and and uh dialed the
inflammation completely back down to
normal
so so it's and this is vital this is how
we repair wear and tear
that we get from the wear and tear of
aging from working out too hard from
being burned having a sunburn breaking
my breaking uh bones uh having a muscle
injury i need
my cytokines to come in to help in my
immune cells to help guide that repair i
need a different set of cytokines to
come in
to announce the repairs all done
when the
a immune cell encounters a new virus the
the novel virus my innate immune cells
have to call in cytokines to come and
start killing off that that virus so
it's really important that i can quickly
call in the calvary
and they all get to very quickly kill
these viruses
if it's a slow response i have to keep
that
keep that response on too long
if my body's already inflamed
because i eat a lot of sugar because i
have severe obesity because i'm a smoker
because i have severe asthma because i
have a lot of air pollution because i
have an autoimmune condition that's not
well controlled
those those states increase uh molecule
calls and slimosome nrlp3
and are driven by a process called nf
kappa b
and so
all of my inflammation
cytokines are a little
too reactive and too high
in those situations i'm going to be much
more likely to have that runaway train
with the cytokine storm
so that's part of why
smoking is such a big problem now why
air pollution such a big problem so in
those communities where there's a lot of
air pollution water pollution they're
going to have
a much higher rate of the kovid 19.
if you're a smoker or you're severely
obese
or if you have an autoimmune condition
that's not well controlled
you're going to have a bigger problem
and i talk about those things in my book
then of kappa b the inflammasomes and
how diet and lifestyle
either if you have the conventional
standard american diet full of sugar
you're driving up your inflammation
if you are sitting around all the time
being very sedentary you drive up your
inflammation
if you're in conflict all of the time
you're gonna drive up your inflammation
if you eat these radical things known as
vegetables lots of greens cabbage you
know beets carrots berries
and you meditate and you do moderate
exercise you bring all that stuff down
very nicely
and you don't have high insulin you
don't have high blood sugar
and
again i don't have
any studies that have looked at these
lifestyle factors but from a mechanistic
standpoint
we would certainly predict that if
you're following the walls protocol
you've greatly lowered your
vulnerability
towards the cytokine storm yeah that
that i think we are in an age where
that's really important
obviously it is not the end-all be-all
but i've become really obsessed with n
of one so um my wife my my poor viewers
have heard me talk about this so many
times but she got sick and she went from
i'm not feeling great feeling weird
that's what she said i'm feeling weird i
was like what does that mean and then it
was actually i'm feeling kind of
nauseous and then she called me and it's
like i am literally projectile vomiting
and i was like what is happening and so
then it just wouldn't go away her
stomach was just upset all the time and
it becomes a massive problem of course
we end up realizing its microbiome that
this is dysregulation dysbiosis is
caused by years of antibiotic use um
whole story there but realizing okay
it doesn't matter what the literature
says what matters is what's working for
you and so we became obsessed with um
researching for sure to get sort of
broad strokes about what people you know
were sort of pointing us towards we
tried the autoimmune protocol for a
while fodmap all of that stuff and
ultimately we found the things that were
really inflammatory for her that maybe
for the next person weren't a problem
but for her they were but what i want
people to understand and the reason that
i'm so enamored with your story
is taking that ownership doing the
research seeing an angle like you said
where your physicians
they weren't not telling you this
because they wanted to keep a secret
from you they weren't telling you
because they didn't know
and so going in and having a hypothesis
this has something to do with
mitochondria testing it even the end of
one test that you did with your your um
your supplements is brilliant and so
people taking the time to try these
things out for themselves so i get it
you don't have all the data that you
want but i think it's it's really
powerful and i think it's
something that's
incredibly helpful is to journal because
you need to be your own principal
investigator for your life
that we all have a unique uh dna a
unique life experiences
in terms of what are
the exposures what are the factors
uh and so
ideally you know what symptom am i
trying to address
what is my intervention and you can
decide is it two weeks a hundred days
somewhere in that time frame to decide
yep this intervention is helpful or it's
not me about what are you putting in the
journal are you describing i ate this i
did this i am in this place because for
some people the environment itself is
the toxic thing
and then do they describe i feel this
way today
and it the depths that you're to go into
that will depend on the person
the more
detail you put in the journal the more
information you'll have but if you make
it so exhaustive then it's hard to keep
up
and so
i'd like to have an initial entry of
here's what the symptom that i'm trying
to measure here's a description of my
intervention
and then depending on the intervention
i'm going to have to log that
so that i know that i've done that
if you have decided for example if
you're going to do the walls protocol
i my advice people is be all in
do it a hundred percent so that at the
end of your intervention period ideally
a hundred days
you can know know like okay
it it worked or it did not and i need to
you know get further assistance with a
integrated functional medicine doc to
investigate this further
but if you just sort of do the diet at
the end of the hundred days you won't
know if
if
doing the full program would actually
make a difference and what's the bigger
problem leaving something in your diet
or your lifestyle that is problematic or
failing to add a nutrient
you know
everyone's going to be somewhat unique i
think the first thing you want to do is
get the most inflammatory foods out
so sugar gluten dairy and eggs are the
four that really want people to get out
and then
if you add in
more vegetables and a good source of
protein that is sort of the high level
conversation i define good protein
well you need a complete protein so if
you're a vegetarian that's going to be
legumes and gluten-free grains
if you're meat eater then that's going
to be meat um i
there is something really magical about
having organ meat so i want people to
have liver once a week it is just like a
phenomenal superfood if you if you can't
do that
and you're a meat eater you could take
their bunch of organ meat capsules that
one could take and i know plenty of my
followers have gone down that route and
i'm glad to see them go down that route
rather than not have any organ
but you know some of my ancestors valued
uh liver's heart uh brains brains was
particularly uh prized
those were very helpful
and they were superfoods
and
many traditional societies would
prioritize the superfoods for the
members of the clan that we're trying to
conceive
and for uh mom
moms that are breastfeeding interesting
wow i've never heard that before if a
clan doesn't have babies you got a
problem
no kidding so how much liver should i be
eating
um six ounces to eight ounces a week
a lot of great nutrition
vitamin a fabulously good for you
if you have not enough uh
your immune cells can't protect you from
infection or cancer
if you have too much
uh vitamin a
over a long time you'll you'll begin to
have some scarring of your liver and
your lungs
so six to eight ounces you'll be fine
if you go more than eight ounces
long term eventually it will get to be a
problem
and you know most of our nutrients are
like that
everything is a u-shaped curve if you
don't have enough there's a disease
state if you have too much there's a
disease state even water
if there's not enough water we die of
dehydration
but if there's too much water
we die we can have strokes
and die of water intoxication
and so when i when i point that out to
people that
every nutrient
is a u-shaped curve um so one thing that
i wanted to ask you um as we were going
through and i want to i want to keep
this in context of the walls protocol
and exactly what people should be doing
so you just told us what we should be
eliminating um at a high level
love to get a little bit more about what
we should be in taking and then how much
does seasonality and where your
ancestors uh you know have been for the
last 20 000 years like how much does
that play into all this
so
as i think about all of this i i think
about
my recommendations through an
evolutionary biology perspective uh
ancestral health perspective uh what i
can find uh based on clinical trials
uh and can i uh
from a molecular cellular physiology
pathway does this make sense
i and so
my recommendations
i want to have us
try and emulate as well as we can
with a within our modern life and
conveniences
more of the environments
that our ancestors would have had
that our dna evolved with
so our dna expects us to be physically
very active
and that if we chew if we chew hard
foods as kids
we're going to have much broader faces
we won't have
crooked teeth
and you won't have to spend twenty
thousand dollars or more to correct the
airway for your children and they won't
have sleep apnea growing up
when they're adults i had no idea it
changed the i knew that it strengthened
your jaw i had no idea changed the shape
of your face it changes the shape of
your face it gives you more uh
room for your prefrontal cortex so your
kids will have better decision making
as well so that all sorts of reasons to
not use boots to not use so much baby
food
to breastfeed and to have kids chew and
eat hard stuff
wow
at an early early age
and then physical activity how do we
maintain physical activity um how
do we improve the quality of our sleep
at night
and then in terms of the of the diet
choices i recommend
there are many versions uh of diets that
work that's why humans could spread all
over the globe
we have diets that can work in asia in
africa in europe and north and south
america and all of our diets are adapted
to local seasons uh local
geography
and so i get a little crazy when people
are telling me that they're trying to
import
kale because i talk so much about kale
no no just eat your own local greens
eat your own local cabbage family
vegetables your own local onion and
garlic family vegetables your own local
culinary mushrooms
and then
your
local herbs and spices
so you have lots of diversity
and
i fully endorse eating local with the
seasons
and think about our eating uh paradigm
that that my goal is 200 different plant
species in a year
whoa
how do you get that all locally
you know actually um
once once you decide that i'm going to
do this
and you make a sort of a game out of it
for your family and you have a little
chart
now the whole family
can get fired up about well let's try
these spices and teas so that may not be
all local because now we're trading for
that
that expands things
it also makes people far more excited
when i go to the grocery store like i've
never seen that vegetable we gotta bring
it home let's figure out what it is
because then add it to the list
it gets people much more excited
now one thing that i know so my wife
really struggled vegetables are sort of
the bane of her existence in terms of
what she can and candy she has to be
very careful so if we're trying to get
200 are there ones like nightshades or
something that we should be avoiding or
no no like go crazy try everything
um i think it depends on the clinical
context so if someone has rheumatoid
arthr if they have an autoimmune
condition affecting their joints
or inflammatory bowels they're more
likely to not do well with nightshades
otherwise i start out with the least
restrictive diet taking out sugar gluten
dairy eggs
sorry i i have meant to ask you about
that every time you've said eggs yeah i
love eggs i eat the most eggs ever
where do they become a problem
eggs have a lot of great nutrients in
them particularly in the yolk
the white the protein in the white
is probably the third most common uh
protein for causing a food sensitivity
issue
so
for people having any kind of health
challenges
or who are not uh their ideal body
weight
or have mood issues i have them take out
now sugar gluten dairy eggs
add up the other things i recommend and
then at the end end of the three months
put the eggs back
and if the eggs don't give them any
problem fine they're then they're very
fortunate that eggs are fine and eggs
are really great nutrition
for me if i had eggs
my face pain turns on
so
for me it's never it's not going to work
yeah and i totally get that um talk to
you you said something about food and
mood um which is i'm a i am a just
dogmatic proponent of the the connection
between what you eat and how you feel um
but walk people through
how much food it can influence their
mood
well so the food that you and i eat
are microbes in our gut help us digest
the food make
vitamins uh and as they break down our
food into smaller molecules they'll get
into our bloodstream
and what a lot of people don't realize
is that many of these smaller molecules
are actually neurotransmitters
that will then get into the bloodstream
come to the brain cross the blood-brain
barrier
and influence my mood in terms of
anxiety depression mental clarity
energy levels fatigue
i and
they will also
activate or calm the microglia that is
the immune cells in my brain
if my microglia are activated
i will be more irritable i'll be more
fatigued and i'll have more brain fog
do you have particular diets for anxiety
and depression
yes the wall is protocol start with that
because what i'm trying to do is create
health and then assess your response
instead of thinking of treating disease
i really push everyone the goal is to
create health and vitality
i'll let your prescribing physicians
your medical team treat your disease
we're going to create health we're going
to
try and get that mismatch between what
your dna expects and how you're running
your life to narrow
and as we do that sort of step by step
by improving your diet and improving
your self-care
we may discover that we have to make uh
further adjustments with your diet
based on who you are and your in your
spiritual beliefs or religious beliefs
but i'm i'm i i'm much less focused on
disease
i'm far more focused on creating health
because we all have mitochondria we all
have cellular structures so if i focus
on teaching you how to feed your
cellular structures
as your cellular pathways all work
better
what you'll probably find is your blood
pressure is better your blood sugars are
better your mood is better and so by
focusing on cellular health
inadvertently
disease states often improve
yeah but i it also makes my
medical colleagues far more comfortable
if i tell them look i'm not treating any
disease state you're treating the
diseases i'm just helping people with
their health behaviors
helping them improve their overall
quality of life and our sense of
vitality and you'll have to watch them
closely and adjust medicines
as clinically warranted
that's something that my
colleagues
are comfortable with and of course as
i've had more and more success over
these last 12 years
people who used to he used to say
terry you cannot treat every disease the
same way
and so i got i kept saying i'm not
treating disease i'm creating health you
are the one treating the disease i'm
just working on their health behaviors
and now my colleagues are saying you
know what sir you can you really can
treat every disease the same way
dude that that's big that's really big
getting people to understand that notion
of i mean you're probably right it's
better to think of it not as treating
the disease but as creating health but
since so many people are chronically ill
now especially in developed nations
getting them to understand hey whatever
you have the treatment is probably
something like this so i think you may
have already um hinted at this but if
you are going to have people make
one change to their lifestyle that would
have the biggest impact on their health
what change would you have them make
remove sugar
and gluten and replace it with more
vegetables if you want to have yams
squashes sweet potatoes uh you know that
would be fine uh that would be profound
uh i'd also like to see you eat more
greens
more uh leafy greens you know kale swiss
chard spinach romaine lettuce
parsley cilantro
that would be profound
well every once a week could be good too
i love it
all right where can people um get the
book the walls protocol where can
so here's my book it's beautiful
so find me at terrywalls.com t-e-r-r-y
walls w-a-h-l-s dot com and if you go to
terrywalls.com forward slash diet you
can get a one-page handout
and if you go to terrywalls.com forward
slash webinar we have a short summary
that
highlights my research and it's very
exciting
amazing terry thank you so much for
coming on the show today this is amazing
your story is insane and what you're
doing what you're researching and what
you're sharing with people is absolutely
extraordinary i'm so so grateful that
you came on so thank you very much for
joining us thank you
you got it all right guys if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and if you
haven't done into her world do it trust
me you'll be rewarded a thousand-fold
it's incredible all right everybody
until next time be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential